the journalists uh the donors and the
parties got so used to being able to
almost completely control who got to be
the nominee that when someone came along
and disrupted the whole pattern they
didn't know how to respond to it except
with total rage and incomprehension and
they didn't realize that Trump was just
being smart and running against the
system and it was scoring heavily with
people all over the place across the
political
[Music]
Spectrum hello everyone watching and
listening today I'm speaking with author
and journalist Matt taibe we discussed
his early career both in journalism and
professional basketball his time in the
USSR learning Russian and Publishing a
successful Gonzo inspired newspaper and
is breaking coverage of the subprime
mortgage bubble we also examine the
state of the world today with Russia and
the US military industrial complex the
upcoming presidential election and the
dire necessity for alternative news
sources Matt I have to know what was it
like playing for the usbeck national
baseball
team uh that was great actually I uh at
the time I was trying to be a freelance
reporter in usbekistan I was really
young in my 20s and I walked by a uh a
university field and saw a bunch of
Cubans playing baseball so uh they were
I think Cuban Refrigeration students and
I was the only American on the team U we
had a fun time playing against other
Central uh Asian teams and um we had one
one funny story we had ground rules uh
if you hit a sheep at one field it was a
triple if you hit a cow it was a double
and if you knocked the cow out was that
a home run or was it a consequence of
the degree of damage I don't think we
ever got that far so your career plan
was to be an independent journalist in
usbekistan and that didn't work out so
you turned to pro
baseball well at the time I was more
interested in being a writer uh just
generally than being a reporter I
thought um I had been living in St
Petersburg which was filled at the time
with uh freelance journalists and I
thought I'm not getting a lot of work
I'll move to a place where there are no
reporters so I moved to the middle of
nowhere basically waited for something
to happen uh so that I could get a by
line and a um a wire servers or
something like that but I figured while
I was there maybe I could do something
like write a book about you know playing
baseball for the USCS and I ended up
doing that that kind of thing a lot I
moved to Mongolia later played
basketball and the Mongolian Basketball
Association well that was my next
question okay because that's obviously
The Logical career progression move for
someone who's a journalist in usbekistan
and then playing baseball is to go to
Mongolia and play pro basketball so tell
me about that yeah that happened because
I was working um in Moscow for a an
expad paper called the Moscow times
which still exists and I played a lot of
street basketball uh back in those days
at uh Moscow State un iversity you've
probably seen pictures it's got that
beautiful gigantic sort of wedding cake
skyscraper building in the background
used to go there in the afternoons and
play hoops and there was a kid there
from Mongolia uh who told me they had a
league in Mongolia called the NBA which
was the only basketball league in the
world that played by NBA rules with a 24
second clock and everything so I quit my
job the next day got in the train and
got on the Trans Siberian Railroad and
went to um Mongolia had a try out played
for a season in the Mongolian Basketball
Association so were you were you big
among the Mongolian fan
girls a little bit you know it was
actually um it was actually quite an
experience uh Mongolia at the time was
very basketball crazy and there's a long
story about why uh but basically every
Mongolian kid was playing basketball in
the early 90s and
you know my friends what um were big
celebrities in the country uh there was
one of my teammates was considered the
Mongolian Jordan so everywhere I went
there were lots of people following us
around it was pretty cool well that's
that's all completely unexpected and
crazy now you also went to the Leningrad
poly Technic was it the St Petersburg
poly Technic by then or and why did you
end up why did you end up in in the da
missiles of the former Soviet Union what
what how did that all come about and why
did you decide to stay there for well a
number of years when I was a kid I was
uh fairly lonely and depressed and
introverted and the thing that I found
that became my escap in life is that I
fell in love with uh comic fiction and
my favorite writers were all Russian
writers like gole uh and
bulgak and my uh decision as a very
young man was to move to
um the then Soviet Union and learn
Russian so that I could read those books
in the original language so when I
studied originally it was actually still
Leningrad Polytech I'm old enough to
have gone uh to school in the Soviet
Union and um I went there to study
Russian even though it was a poly
technical school they they had a Russian
language faculty for all the new
students and that's that's what I did
there so did you read the master in
margarita in the original Russian I did
I did that's a tough one I'm not going
to lie I bet it's it's a tough book man
yes some some of the Russian writers are
easier than others to read for a
foreigner I would say tul stto is easier
he's just very clear uh but there's a
you know there's a tradition of a
different kind of writer unfortunately
like my favorite gole DKI is another one
bulak they use very very know convoluted
long sentences um and but they're
beautiful I mean Russian's a beautiful
language yeah well the master Margarita
that's I don't know maybe is that the
most complex dreamlike novel ever
written might I think I've read it three
times you know it's well it's a crazy
book I mean it it's got five or six
things going on at the same time all of
which are Preposterous and surreal and
it's very very sophisticated
multi-layered work I mean it's it's
really it's really quite the piece of
fiction
um I can understand why you would be
motivated to learn Russian although that
that's a hell of a motivation to to read
it and so now you also worked um at a
newspaper in Moscow was that the Exile
was that what it was called originally I
worked at the moska Times which was sort
of the straight news um newspaper for
the big burgeoning expat Community um
which was quite large in the 9s uh in in
Moscow and then I I left that
and ended up um co-staring my own
newspaper called the Exile which was
kind of a cross of timeout and screw
magazine it's hard to explain but it was
sort of a uh a satirical nightlife guide
let's put it that way and it's gotten me
in some trouble um you know not in my
later years but um it was an experiment
in in extreme free speech uh doing
everything saying the way a normal
newspaper would do it but
backwards uh we had Corrections for
things that had never appeared in the
paper I mean we tried to make an
absolute joke of the of the whole
newspaper format how did that go over in
Moscow I mean it's not exactly known as
a Bastion of free speech so how did that
work out it actually worked out um
brilliantly believe it or not the the
the people who are in Moscow in the in
the '90s and especially the late 90s uh
that was a crazy City it was a lot like
the wild west um or Chicago in the 1930s
this was a place where you know
superpower had just dissolved the laws
had not yet been built back up people
were making fortunes overnight there was
gunfire in the streets people were being
defenestrated left and right it was not
uncommon to see dead bodies um so a
newspaper like ours actually
fit right in with the tenor of that
whole Community we were quite popular uh
just you know we actually made money we
were profitable it was a normal small
business that made money and um it
worked out quite well for a while uh but
you know eventually there there came a
time when Putin came to power where you
know the paper was just not tolerated
and so what what happened when it when
it became not tolerated were you still
around I had left by that time um I
already left in uh 2002 but shortly
after that the paper got a visit from
the tax police and um you know whereas
before we could always pay a bribe and
make them go away uh this time they
weren't satisfied with that in the paper
uh ultimately got closed but um yeah
well you know a state is corrupt when
you can't even bribe it right yeah I
mean that's uh what's an honest person
to do in in Russia at that point so
right exactly well at least when you're
dealing with someone with whom you share
a common language of greed you can
understand what they're up to but once
you're out in the moral Hinterland where
that doesn't work God only knows what's
up their sleeves so were you a fan of
the Gonzo journalists like Hunter S
Thompson he's probably the canonical
example I was I I was a fan of Hunter
Thompson I I read him actually later uh
in life than some other uh journalist
that was probably more of a fan earlier
of HL manin but um I Lov Hunter Thompson
in fact at one point I got hired uh by a
publishing company to try to put
together an anthology of Gonzo
journalism and that project and ended up
failing um when I realized mid project
that Gonzo was a term that had no
meaning other than Hunter Thompson uh so
unless we were going to put together
just a whole book full of Hunter's
articles it wasn't going to actually
work so
uh but I was definitely a fan of his uh
his writing well he was he he was
definitely a singular creature I mean
Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas is quite
the piece of work and he what he wrote
one on the Hell's Angels and one about
the campaign Trail they're all great
books right really iconic 60s works and
um I also really like Tom Wolf
especially um the Electric Kool-Aid no U
no no no uh like the Kool-Aid Acid Test
yep yes exactly and and and candy
colored Tangerine flake baby that's also
great collection of of essays he wasn't
as much of a Gonzo journalist as
Thompson but man he had an eye for the
times and he could sure write man those
those uh those articles are so
brilliantly plotted in books yeah he
really nailed it so and Thompson is just
of course a complete bloody scream so
absolutely and it's interesting up until
pretty recently there was always a very
strong tradition in American journalism
of the narratively interesting
journalist um
and that's kind of been driven out of
modern journalism unfortunately I would
say yes now we just have the
pathologically uninteresting um mediocre
boring lying journalist type mostly in
the Legacy Media yeah it's so it's so a
pathetic and appalling the New York
Times today reported on underground
climate
change yeah I mean it's it's it's not uh
a good sign when you're writing in the
old boring format of the New York Times
but it doesn't even have the upside of
being semi-reliable like the New York
Times so that's that's kind of a double
whammy uh that's for sure that's for
sure yeah that's right I mean that at at
least when those Enterprises were let's
say more conservative in the traditional
sense you could vaguely assume that some
of what they were reporting bore some
relationship to the facts and so that
that was quite a relief and it's really
quite a catastrophe to see these places
fall apart actually you know I mean
there's a a satirical part of me I
suppose and a somewhat cynical part that
celebrates the demise of Institutions
like the Canadian Broadcasting
Corporation because for all its abysmal
Canadian centralist niceness it was at
least a reliable purveyor of information
and to some degree culture for you know
30 years something like that and uh you
know in many ways it did its job and I
think you could say the same thing
although the New York Times you know had
some pretty bloody egregious sins on its
conscience at least some of the time
what it was producing bore some
resemblance to news instead of whatever
the hell it is they're doing now which
is you know almost impossible to
comprehend either conceptually or or
metaphysically it's it's true yeah it's
funny I I interviewed gome chsky at one
point because I wanted to write a book
that was going to be a rethink of
manufacturing consent which is his
famous book of um media criticism and
that book is actually is full of
criticism of the New York Times but when
I asked him about the times he said you
know people got the wrong idea about my
book you know the New York Times is full
of facts it's just got lots of problems
you have to learn to read it and fight
through the biases that are in it and um
you know so I think unfortunately the
the uh lack of attention paid to the
factual aspect has taken away uh some
important value from those
institutions so when were you at the
poly Technic what what years were that
oh that would have been I was in Russia
studying in 89 and 90 primarily uh so
you really were there during the wild
times in in Russia yeah and then I
stayed in Russia um I went back after
school and I stayed from 1991 till about
2002 um there were some trips in between
so do you think well so you you have a
real personal connection with that
country obviously and a pretty detailed
knowledge of it what do you have to say
if anything and what are your thoughts
on what's happening on the with regard
to the Russia Ukraine
conflict well first of all that
situation is extraordinarily complicated
uh it's been frustrating for me to watch
the coverage of um you know the Russia
Ukraine
conflict uh you know people not
understanding the history of places like
Crimea uh or how far back some some of
these uh conflicts in places like
luhansk and Don
Basco um I I don't at all agree with the
invasion you know by Vladimir Putin in
fact we were very heavy critics of Putin
from the start when he came to power um
but you know there's a long
backstory uh here with the United States
support
of um Ukraine and some pretty
questionable kind of far-right elements
in UK in Ukraine as a way to sort of
undermine pretty questionable yeah
exactly yeah so this goes back you know
decades before even the collapse of the
Soviet Union and a lot of that
background is left out of all this it's
kind of an open question in my mind
whether we ever really entertained a
situation where um NATO wasn't going to
expand all the way to Russia's borders
uh I think you know there's a reason why
a lot of academics in
1997 uh pretty conservative ones were
signing an open letter urging the
American authorities not to keep pushing
NATO towards Russia Boris Johnson
announced today that the expansion of
NATO into Ukraine should be of no
concern to the
Russians yeah I don't understand that I
mean I I I I keep seeing that trying to
I think he's trying to top his net zero
idiocy
personally maybe that's that's possible
but you know think of the Legends in the
United States right we have movies like
13 days where you know the the arrival
of one missile or a couple of missiles
in Cuba is grounds to uh you know start
this uh awesome confrontation risking
nuclear Annihilation for the entire
planet uh but we think the Russians
shouldn't object if they're surrounded
on all sides by military bases should
they re respond by invading another
country I I don't agree with that but I
certainly understand um knowing this
just from talking to Russians while I
was there what their feelings are about
n NATO they're very um nervous about it
they've always been since the early 90s
it's a situation they've been conscious
of the whole time and I think Americans
don't understand
that last month the G20 announced a plan
to impose digital currencies and digital
IDs on their populations Central Bank
digital currencies essentially allow the
government to track every purchase you
make officials can even prohibit you
from purchasing certain products or
easily freeze or seize part or all of
your money concerned Americans are
diversifying their assets into physical
gold with the help of Birch gold if you
want a physical asset held in a tax
sheltered retirement account you should
call Birch gold text Jordan to 98 9898
and they'll send you a free info kit on
gold the easiest way to become a Birch
gold customer is if you have an IRA or
401K from a previous employer just
Gathering dust Birch gold can help you
convert it into an IRA in gold and you
don't pay a penny out of pocket text
Jordan to 98 9898 claim your free info
kit on gold then call them because if
digital currency becomes a reality it'll
be nice to have some gold to fall back
[Music]
on well you know I think we had a real
opportunity to bring Perman peace um to
put to put in place a permanent peace
with the Russians and and that could
have happened during the '90s and we
pretty much fouled that up as badly as
we possibly could have and now we're
paying the price and God only knows how
that pot brewing in in Russia and
Ukraine is going
to what the consequence of it of its
continued bubbling way in the background
are going to be it's very distressing
and the fact that more attention isn't
paid to it and the fact that there seems
to be no real attempts to bring about
anything that looks like a serious
attempt at peace talks is really quite
the Staggering Miracle to me so I don't
know what the hell we think we're
playing at exactly and I can't
understand for the life of me what the
endgame is you know I've talked to a lot
of hawks in Washington and these are
people whose views I generally respect
and you know their sense was that if the
if the West had to spend several tens of
billions of dollars although it's rocket
it beyond that now to weaken Russia's
conventional military that that might
not be S such a bad investment you know
and I have some qualms about that theory
because it isn't obvious to me that a
weak nuclear armed country is less
dangerous than a strong nuclear armed
country and I think you could have an
intelligent discussion about that but I
also don't think that weakening Germany
after the first world war turned out to
be such a brilliant idea either and so
and I I guess I also think think that
like wouldn't it be better all things
considered if Russia and the West were
Allied let's say and presented a stable
unitary front in relationship say to the
Chinese I mean just to throw that out
there and I think we could have had that
and it seems to me that it's a lot of
leftover Cold War era thinking in some
ways and I suppose some real
self-interest on the part of the
military-industrial complex that's kept
this war
brewing and I don't know it seems to me
that the primary beneficiaries of the
current situation in the Ukraine are
arms manufacturers and and and the the
self-same military-industrial complex
andan they don't have Afghanistan
anymore keep things to keep the market
hopping but they've certainly got a war
that could go on forever or expand quite
nicely in Russia and the Ukraine I mean
do you think I'm missing something in
that analysis undoubtedly right because
it's a complex situation but I I I think
that's that's pretty much right I think
we had an opportunity to genuinely bring
in the Russians at least as a strategic
partner there was always going to be
some friction there the two countries um
both see themselves as
superpowers uh there's some resentment
some cultural resentment that's true in
both places um where you know neither of
them wants to concede that the other is
more powerful U so there's always going
to be some difficulty between those two
countries but they did agree on things
like uh you know facing Islamic
terrorism together right I think you I
think they demonstrated that kind of
cooperation was possible but the people
you reference the kind of hawkish uh
contingent within the foreign policy
Elite in Washington I think if you ask
them deep down what the endgame to all
this
the answer they would come up with is
regime change in Russia I think they I
think they really believe that yeah and
so what's that going to be what's that
going to be he man we're going to get
someone better than Putin are we given
Russia's history and then maybe we could
have instead a fractured State and so
then what would we have we'd have the
control of nuclear weapons in the hands
of essentially Warlords if the state
collapsed like what the hell would be
the positive regime change here exactly
we' get some real Democrat in Russia
it's like I don't think so that seems to
me to be preposterously naive CU where
in Russia his in his where in Russian
history could you find one example of
that that you could point to that's even
vaguely credible and if you want Russian
leaders worse than Putin that's a very
very long list so I just don't
understand that at all and the danger of
the breakup of the country especially
given our dependence on I mean the
world's dependence on Russia for certain
Necessities energy for examp example for
the Europeans or ammonia for food
production or edible wheat there'd be
another one you know it's like for
obviously we're strategically aligned in
many ways with Russia and the idea that
there's going to be some magical
transformation of regime that's going to
make them easier to get along with is
like why would you think that I mean
dead seriously I don't understand how
anybody could possibly imagine
that well it's the same error of vision
that we had going into Iraq where we
imagine that we could roll tanks into
Baghdad and establish Switzerland
overnight it doesn't really work that
way there's history and a long uh
cultural tradition that you have to take
into account but you know that war was
launched by people who didn't even know
there was a difference between Sunni and
Shia uh Muslims and you know this War I
think is being prosecuted by people who
have no conception of Russian history
Far Eastern
history um you know the inability of
democracy to really ever take hold in
that part of the world if you're
sincerely hoping that somebody better
than Putin is going to come along if you
depose that person um you're not looking
uh honestly I think at the at that
country's past yeah well that's that's
certainly how it seems to me so I don't
know what the hell we're playing out and
I think that I really think that what's
happening is that because I've been
trying to account for the absolute
idiocy of Western foreign policy in
relationship to Russia for the last 30
years criminally negligent to say the
least and I
think really what likely happened is
that clueless people gave the foreign
policy situation kind of a backseat and
so it was never a pressing concern like
it might have been in the aftermath of
the Cold War and then there's constant
pressure from the munitions manufa es
Etc to keep a warlike hawk-like stance
at hand and I can understand that you
know like if you're a Munitions
manufacture obviously you're going to be
somewhat paranoid with regard to the
stability of Foreign Affairs in your
public pronouncements and likely your
beliefs and since you have a pecuniary
interest in the outcome the your ability
to continually Foster a pro- hawk pro-
paranoid anti-russian view well that's
always going to be there because why
wouldn't it be and if there isn't
something to offset that that's
continual like a real effort to make
peace for example then that's not going
to happen you know when you think well
peace with Russia is impossible I would
say yeah that's what people said about
the Middle East too and then some some
relatively radical nonprofessional
diplomats decided they were going to do
something about it and hammered together
the Abraham Accords in basically no time
flat
and so the idea and they just walked
around the state department to do that
and they did that with a tremendous
degree of success and if the Biden
Administration hadn't been so Juvenile
and um resentful they would have patted
Trump on the back for having
accomplished that I always thought you
know if they would have given Trump the
bloody Nobel Prize or maybe a medal at
the White House for his work on the
Abraham Accords he might have just
ridden off into the sunset happy right
instead of hanging around well
absolutely absolutely and then the
Saudis would have signed the Abraham
Accords because they were basically
chomping at the bit to do so and then
you Americans could have had access to
Saudi oil instead of having Biden go cap
and hand to them after insulting them
terribly and not noting what they did
for example behind the scenes for the
abrahamic cords and walking away
empty-handed you know like Jesus you
can't make this stuff up you know and
I've talked to Democrats about this I
said why the hell don't you celebrate
Trump at least for the bloody Abraham
Accords and their response to me is
always well you know they're not as good
as they look it's like well yeah
compared to what anything you guys
managed for like 70 years they're pretty
damn good as a first step I mean there's
real there's actually peace breaking out
between Israel and a variety of Arab
states and like who the hell would have
ever predicted that the idea we couldn't
do that with Russia especially given our
mutual apprehension let's say of the
Chinese and well warranted apprehension
I think that's utterly preposterous so I
also know from behind the scenes that
you know there were peace talks in the
offing in March of 2022 and they were
scuttled by the US Administration and so
you know that's pretty damn unforgivable
as far as I'm concerned and we flag wave
and hop up and down morally about
supporting the Democrats you know and
this desire for democracy in Ukraine all
the while you know conveniently ignoring
the fact that Ukraine has just as
totalitarian history as the rest of the
former Soviet Union and are hardly
Paragons of moral virtue by any stretch
of the imagination and are unlikely to
overnight to turn overnight into
Switzerland as was precisely the case in
Iraq so like I don't understand it man I
don't see what's going on at all and
it's a bloody dangerous game that we're
playing yeah even even more
disappointing from my point of view is
at least during the Iraq War there was
an an anti-war movement that was visible
in the United States stes um there was
an incredible episode early in this
whole situation where I think a handful
of uh members of the house put together
what they called the peace letter which
very generically suggested that maybe
opening peace talks might be a good idea
at some point they weren't suggesting
that Ukraine surrender or that you know
they stop fighting or anything along
those lines but even within that
Coalition um the idea collapsed and they
ended up kind of snitching on each other
in the media and there was no effort
along those lines so there's there's no
longer an anti-war Coalition of any kind
anywhere in American politics um you
know that even even does symbolic
politics yeah left or right you know and
it's really it's really quite something
it's quite the miracle to see it's very
it's really incomprehensible in many
ways I I can't I can't wrap my head
around it all right so you were in the
former Soviet Union during the insane
90s when did you come back to the States
like and I don't know what happened to
you say between say about the year 2000
and 2004 you started to work for Rolling
Stone in 2004 so what did you do after
you had completed whatever it was you
were up to in these multiple adventures
in the former Soviet Union and how do we
know you're not a Russian spy by the
way
um well uh the the Russians would never
hire somebody like me to be a spy I
think I I'm I'm the wrong type for them
uh but I see so it's in it's in it's on
the basis of your self-perceived
incompetence that we should trust you
yeah exactly I'd be unable to keep quiet
about it I think is is the problem but
the right right noisy journalists don't
make the best spies exactly exactly um I
I had been in you know while I was at
the Exile Rolling Stone had actually
done a a story about our newspaper in
the late 90s so I had some contact with
the magazine before I came back to the
States I came back in 2002 I briefly
tried to start a newspaper in buffalo
called the beast um which was modeled
out on the Exile but pretty quickly got
a call from uh Rolling Stone from the
editor there who remembered me had been
keeping an eye on me and uh suggested
that I go out and start covering the
campaign um that was just starting in
200 3 so really almost as soon as I came
back to the United States I started
working for Rolling Stone uh essentially
as a campaign reporter to start and uh
eventually as more of a financial SL
investigative reporter so what did you
learn uh we were talking about hunterz
Thompson earlier and famously he wrote a
book called uh Fear and Loathing on the
campaign Trail if I remember correctly
which is quite the riotous um account
what did you learn about American yeah
yeah absolutely absolutely and and it's
a book I mean it's a very interesting
piece of cultural history now but it's
certainly a book that stands on its own
merits as well as being an interesting
journalistic account what did you learn
about the American political
system that that that you didn't know
and that was surprising serving as a
campaign reporter well my first
complication in covering American
politics having come from the former
Soviet Union was that in postcommunist
Russia everything was VIs ible you could
see which mafia interests were
supporting which politician you could
see the real financial interest behind
every contract that was given out by the
government uh you the corruption was as
clear as it would have been if you were
taking one of those tours with a glass
bottom boat looking at the bottom of the
ocean um in the United States you know
when I I went out in the campaign trail
and I going out in the campaign Trail
and listening to these people give one
speech after another where they said
absolutely nothing for a long time I was
really puzzled by it I thought there had
to be another layer of something to
American politics that was more
interesting than this and for a long
time I I I was really um very frustrated
by the
predictability of the American uh
political system the way there was kind
of a conspiracy of Interest I would say
between the donors the campaign
journalists and the political parties to
really very strictly uh control who got
to be considered a legitimate and
serious candidate and who didn't and
they did this through a variety of means
they use sort of code words uh you know
somebody like Dennis cinic would be
dismissed as Fringe or
Elfin um and Howard Dean would be called
pointed uh and angry but John Cary was
nuanced and warm right and this this is
how we signal to audiences that this was
the it's the climate change making him
warm by the way right exactly yeah other
otherwise he wasn't terribly warm I I
would say um but I think you know and
and this is all a preview to the Trump
experience because I think what happened
was the journalists uh the donors and
the parties got so used to being able to
almost completely control who got to be
the nominee um that when someone came
along and disrupted the whole pattern
they didn't know how to respond to it
except with total rage and
incomprehension they thought something
must be totally a miss somebody must be
cheating somehow and they didn't
realized that Trump was just being smart
and running against the system I mean I
recognized this pretty early in
2016 which was he was running against
the journalists he was running against
the donors he was running against the
the fake two-party system which was
really a onep party system and it was
scoring heavily with people all over the
across the political Spectrum but nobody
really wanted to admit that they just
wanted to make them out to be this very
scary villain and um even though some of
those things they said about him were
true they were kind of missing the point
of what what that uh campaign was about
and why it
succeeded starting a business can be
tough especially knowing how to run your
online storefront thanks to Shopify it's
easier than ever Shopify is the global
Commerce platform that helps you sell at
every stage of your business from the
launch your online shop stage all the
way to the did we just hit a million
orders stage Shopify is there to help
you grow our marketing team uses Shopify
every day to sell our merchandise and we
love how easy it is to add more items
ship products and track conversions
Shopify helps you turn browsers into
buyers with the internet's best
converting checkout up to 36% better
compared to other leading Commerce
platforms no matter how big you want to
grow Shopify gives you everything you
need to take control and take your
business to the next level sign up for a
$1 per month trial period at shopify.com
jbp go to shopify.com jbp now to grow
your business no matter what stage
you're at that's shopify.com
[Music]
jbp yeah Victor Davis Hansen wrote a
great book on Trump called the case for
Trump which which is the best thing I've
read on that on that election cycle and
I mean he points out something that
seemed relatively obvious to me at the
time watching from the outside was that
you know Clinton and her crew first of
all I don't think people trusted Hillary
at all because even though she had a lot
of experience because when someone aims
at power that egregiously for like six
decades you really got to wonder what
the hell's going on it's like is it why
is it that important to you you know and
you might think well of course being
president would be that important but
you know it's not that obvious because
if you if you associate with people who
are highly
accomplished many of them would have to
set aside the concerns they're already
engaged in which are often large scale
concerns to consider something like a
political career and so if you're
someone who has the chops to be
president which should mean that you're
good at a lot of things it is obvious
that political power per se would dangle
as the greatest possible opportunity
right maybe you could be coerced or
enticed into running for leadership
because a lot of people come to you and
say you know we really need someone like
you which is the best way to to become a
leader by the way but other than that
you know you're sort of about your own
business whereas Clinton was she was
making a beine for the presidency
certainly even while her husband was
president and so and then of course her
and
her foolish and treacherous advisers I
would say decided that it was perfectly
good thing to sacrifice the American
working class on the altar of their
purported moral virtue and she sunk
herself doing that and it was it was an
act of true hubris and foolishness right
because CL Trump didn't so much win that
election as Clinton lost it because it
was hers for the taking had she not
been who she was I would say
fundamentally and especially had she not
stabed
the American working class in the back
and of course they turned to Trump for
odd reasons you know because it isn't
obvious that this sort of brash
flashy
billionaire would or at least
multi-millionaire would appeal to
workingclass people they're not of the
same economic class obviously but you
know at a wise workingclass guy I once
worked for back in the
1970s he was a conservative and not a
socialist and I was at that time I was
about 14 I was pretty entranced by
socialist ideas and the Socialist Party
in Alberta by province had a pretty good
small business platform and I said why
the hell don't you vote for the
Socialist they have a lot better
platform for your Endeavor than the
conservatives who are a party of big
business and he said small business
owners don't want to be small business
owners they want to be big business
owners and people vote their dreams
not their reality and I thought oh my
God that's so smart and you know and
then I thought too with regards to Trump
is that even though his wealth was
unimaginably uh Out Of Reach for the
typical workingclass person I think
people could look at Trump and think
well there are conceivable universes in
which I could be Donald Trump right that
or this is what I would do with that
money yeah right yeah right right right
right and then he also had this capacity
to speak speak off the cuff and directly
to people you know and I heard from
people who were around Trump especially
when he was talking to military
personnel that he was actually very good
at that and the same people who made
that comment had been around other
politicians who were often floxed and
intimidated when they were talking to
real servicemen you know because well
first of all there was a cultural gap
between them and second you know they
felt morally intimidated in the face of
people who'd actually put themselves on
the line but Trump seemed to have that
ability to talk directly to workingclass
people and you know you have to be a
certain kind of person to do that what
one kind of person you have to be is
someone who
actually regards the working class and
what they're capable of doing which is
working with the degree of respect
that's actually appropriate you know and
I mean I've worked with lots of
workingclass people contractors and so
forth and I had lots of workingclass
jobs and you're an absolute bloody fool
if you don't have respect for you know
electricians and plumbers and carpenters
and and people who keep everything going
who are truly competent because that
requires a high level of honesty and
expertise and communicative ability and
planning and and real knowledge and so
Trump seemed to be able to deal with
people like that maybe because he had so
much experience on the on the
construction yeah the irony of that is
is that uh Hillary Clinton tried to run
actually she quite successfully ran a
similar campaign towards the end end of
her duel with Barack Obama um in the
Pennsylvania primary she ran as the
Avatar of the white working class you
might remember she had all these
speeches about being the granddaughter
of um you know a worker in a lace
Factory and she seemed to really enjoy
that role and and in all the different
personas that I've seen her try to play
on the stump and she has many of them um
that was the one I thought she did best
at uh but she reverted in
2016 to trying to sell herself as the
most experienced Insider which was a
catastrophic strategic error in a year
where there was an unprecedented level
of distrust towards Washington um the
degree to which they were blind to that
was kind of amazing to me and and you
know you you brought up Hunter Thompson
before he actually had a metaphor that
really described how that happens he
talked about how if you go hunting um in
normal times you can't get within a
thousand yards of a bull elk like it's
sensitive to the smallest sound in the
forest it will never let you get near it
but when it's in heat you know you can
drive right past it and you know it it
won't even know that you're there it's
so focused on it's you know its goal of
mating right and that's exactly what
politicians who see the presidency are
like um they become blind to just about
everything but Power uh and they don't
think strategically anymore and I think
that happened to the Democrats in 2016
they they just were not paying attention
to all the different signs that were so
obvious to everybody um around you think
with all their polling and all their
hypothetical Reliance on their idiot
Consultants that they would have been
clued in to some degree and of course
Clinton always also Allied herself with
the progressive front of the Democrats
and that certainly wasn't something in
keeping with the basic Sentiments of the
working class that she also stuck a shiv
in so she certainly deserved to lose and
um whether we deserve to have Trump as
president in consequence well that's a
whole different question but at least he
was a bull in the china shop speaking of
whom what do you I kind of think Robert
F Kennedy is the same sort of force on
the Democrat side I mean what do you
think of Kennedy yeah I like him um you
know and his campaign manager Dennis
cinic is somebody who whom I've known
for a long time going back to the first
camp campaign I ever covered he was
somebody I always respected as a um an
original thinker a real in intellectual
somebody who read two books a day um and
uh and really thought about you know the
future of this country and what possible
solutions um you know might work might
not work yeah you think he's an
impressive character a kusich kusin I do
I've I've do you think he'd be a good
podcast guest I think he would be yes is
is brilliant uh you know his his
politics are controversial but he's got
an incredibly interesting history he was
you know mayor of Cleveland at a
ridiculously young age he was homeless
when he was a kid he lived in a in a car
with his family uh you know he won his
first elections B literally going door
Todo with no Financial backing and um
and so this is the kind of person who's
behind uh rfk's campaign I mean
obviously I don't know Robert F Kennedy
as well you know I did some of his shows
years ago uh but I think he recognizes
As Trump did and as Bernie Sanders also
did in 2016 to a Le um to a lesser
degree that there was this ground swell
of
frustration um building in America
toward I guess you would call it some
sort of mainstream political thought uh
which was increasingly elitist and
indifferent to the fate of ordinary
Americans on both the left and the right
um Kennedy uh I think is going to
succeed just because he's not Joe Biden
just because MSNBC doesn't like him and
CNN doesn't like him those things are
actually advertisements in the current
day and age uh Trump understood this
very keenly in in 2016 he embraced it
and that was one of the reasons why he
did so well and Kennedy I think also
understands this unlike Bernie Sanders
who I think in you know deep within his
heart had a lot of affection for the
Democratic party didn't want to see um
something bad happen to it uh
RFK I I think is running a campaign
where he's willing to go to the
mattresses with um you know the people
within the Democratic party structure
and that's going to be very appealing to
a lot of Voters and a lot of
Independence as well
yeah this is going to be some
ridiculously surreally interesting
presidential campaign man I don't I
don't think we'll have ever seen the
likes of it so it'll be something to
watch so so um what was it like working
for Rolling Stone when you work for them
it was great when I worked for Rolling
Stone Rolling Stone had a couple of
heydays I would say in the late 60s and
and the 70s obviously the the magazine
did both great music journalism and some
groundbreaking um journalism of other
types including Hunter Thompson but they
also published you know people like um
Carl
Bernstein uh they eventually brought in
PG
oror they kind of pioneered this this
formula of you know reporting that was
serious but it was also witty uh and and
readable and then you know they they
regressed a little bit in the 90s but
when I came in in the early 2000s they
had just brought in some new editors and
um and they were fantastic they let me
do work uh that I know a lot of the
senior people didn't agree with but they
were really encouraging um and they let
me get into some areas that were really
weird and unusual for a mainstream
American News mainstream American
Magazine and that was great it was a
great time for a long time and then it
got a little strange at the end what was
the most interesting area you dealt D
into when you worked for Rolling Stone
well after the 2008 election you know I
had covered um Obama's win and that was
when the um Financial collapse happened
and they assigned me to do one story uh
basically about what happened at AIG
they wanted me to explain in ordinary
terms you know what what that was um and
we did one story that was called I think
the big takeover and it it just
attempted to translate for ordinary
people um a lot of the verbiage that uh
people used on Wall Street and it the
response to that was so overwhelming
that I ended up doing that for eight
years and so I got to cover all kinds of
crazy things you would never expect a
MAG Music Magazine to take on like you
know the ratings
agencies um you know bidding for
municipal Bond Reg
um you know foreclosure
fraud uh all kinds of stuff like that
and I got 7 8,000 words a shot to do
this and lots of time so so for an
investigative reporter I mean at the
time there were maybe 10 jobs like that
in all journalism and it was uh it was a
great period to do it and the only
problem was that's good deal yeah it was
a great deal but unfortunately the
market has changed quite a lot in the
last three or four well five or six
years I would say now did the great
derangement come out of that your book
The Great derangement came out of the my
earlier um sort of campaign Trail stuff
for Rolling Stone and some other places
I I did some writing for the nation too
at that time where did you write in book
form about the financial collapse so I
wrote a book called griftopia uh it's
griftopia okay another one div yep right
right so so let me recap for a second or
two part of what happened in the runup
to the 2008 financial crisis tell me if
if you think I've got this right and add
anything that you feel would be useful
so my sense was that it was at least in
part of a technological it was a
consequence of a rapid technological
Revolution I mean so the idea as far as
I could tell was that if you so there's
you can you can assign mortgag as a
different risk of default and that seems
math aut atically probable you can look
at the income and the credit history of
the people who have the mortgages and
you can calculate actu the probability
of default and then you can come up with
a risk estimate and then you offset the
risk estimate by either not lending to
the people who are at high risk or
increasing the interest rate okay so
that's pretty straightforward and
Strikes me as highly probable that that
can be done and then the idea was well
if you lumped enough mortgages together
of a certain certain risk category let's
say relatively high risk that you could
average the risk across all the
mortgages that you could calculate
exactly what that risk was
statistically and then you could Define
and offset that so that a large enough
tranch aggregate of mortgages would now
become a defi an an asset of definable
security right which makes it a secure
asset and you know that really is
brilliant that's really really smart now
what happened though was
that what often happens when there's a
financial revolution of that sort is
that the act of producing the instrument
produced unexpected changes in the
market so now that you could sell clumps
of low of high-risk mortgages to like
Pension funds because the risk was
specified you produced an almost
indefinite market for high risk
mortgages and so the consequence of that
was that financial institutions went out
and sold
increasingly high-risk mortgages at a
mad rate forever and that was abetted by
policies stemming from the Democrats and
the Republicans alike designed to foster
home ownership among low-income
Americans which you know sounds like a
fine idea but I suppose selling people
houses they can't actually pay for is
not a good idea and so the consequence
of that was a housing boom a mortgage
boom increased male feasance on on the
mortgage risk rating front and then the
eventual construction of correlated
housing prices across the entire economy
which is something that never happened
before because these things had all now
been linked together behind the scenes
and so then when housing prices started
to collapse in one District that spread
very rapidly and it collapsed everywhere
and that just took the whole game out
but to me the initial the initiator of
that was actually a technological
Revolution on the financial front and
not something corrupt in and of itself
like it led to a form of corrupt it led
to a form of corruption but it wasn't
crooked right at from the from get the
GetGo that's how I understood it I mean
you've looked into this
deeply yeah no that that's exactly right
it it it started off as actually quite a
brilliant idea um you know what you were
describing with mortgage back Securities
this this process called tranching right
um where you could pull
uh a whole group of mortgages let's say
a thousand 2,000 of them uh and you
could take uh a gigantic group of
essentially junk rated mortgages but
peel off a portion of it and sell it as
triaa so it was a Rumple still stilin
story it was you know you take a whole
bunch of straw but you can get a little
bit of gold out of it right and you can
sell that gold as you said to Pension
funds because they have requirements for
were um you know they need to have at
least a certain amount of AAA rated
stuff in the portfolio and this was
earning a higher rate of return Then
traditional AAA Investments so now you
had this booming exploding market for
essentially junk rated mortgages
and that started off as an idea that
produced an awful lot of cash and
capital that you know initially led to a
boom in the economy but it and it
expanded housing ownership which seemed
to be a good thing exactly lots of
people who otherwise wouldn't have been
able to get houses got houses but very
quickly uh you started to develop um all
kinds of fraud schemes that abetted this
where you know the the mortgage
companies which were once incentivized
to prevent you from getting a mortgage
if they didn't think uh you could make
your payments now all of a sudden knew
that as soon as you got into the cool
that they were going to be selling your
mortgage to the next person so they
overlooked all kinds of things did you
have ID did you have a job um you know
were you a citizen uh all that stuff
would kind of be little details like
that yeah little details like that they
would for forget to put that stuff in or
check it um and you know you would have
these big Banks which would be
representing to their customers like
Pension funds that oh yeah we checked
all out all these mortgages that are in
this pool they're all great um and
they're everything that we say they are
and next thing you knew uh people
started to default at a high rate and
couldn't make their payments anymore and
you know the whole house of cards fell
so it's not like a lot of other
Financial booms in history it's just uh
the particular form of this was that it
um it it all happened within the
confines of this system of mortgage back
Securities and there was an additional
complicating Factor
which was that uh this came alongside
the invention of another Financial
instrument type of financial instrument
the credit the fall swap that allowed
Financial companies to bet on the
success of uh of these instruments so
you might have a mortgage and if it
failed you might have a cascading series
of losses that resulted from that
because people were essentially trading
on whether or not that that mortgage was
going
succeed so it it was a way of basically
punching a black hole into the economy
um you know beyond the limits of uh you
know how much money there actually was
in circulation um it was really it was
fascinating to learn about that yeah
it's it's attractive to be cynical about
what happened in 2008 and it's also
attractive to be conspiratorial and to
note that you know there were very there
was almost no criminal prosecution in
the aftermath of the 2008 financial
collapse but you know I'm not unwilling
to assume the utility of punishment
where it's due um but it it's never
really been obvious to me that the
except in you know a relatively small
number of egregious cases that the that
the criminal case for that the case for
criminal conduct could be easily made
given the complexity of the financial
innovations that were also part and
parcel of this now you have focused on
you know the old boys club so to speak
that governs political conduct in the
United States across both parties and
the entrenchment of the uh power elite
let's say that keeps that system going
and you could say the same thing on the
financial side and you've looked deeply
into Financial corruption and the
collapse in 2008 what what was your
sense about what should have been done
in the aftermath of that
catastrophe well I think just as there
were a series of basically symbolic
prosecutions after the accounting
control scandals of the early 2000s like
you know Enron Adelphia Right Aid you
know that sort of thing um that were
designed to send a message to the market
like hey you you can't do this um there
were some obvious cases they could have
taken up uh that would have similarly
sent a message that it's not a good idea
to you know sell gigantic pools of
mortgages that you know have problems
with them that you know are in triaa
that you know um are likely to default
as soon as you sell them and they could
have done that didn't do that and I
think that engendered a lot of problems
and frankly that was something that
Trump picked up on um again in 20 2016
that there was anger um in the
population there were an awful lot of
people who got thrown out of their homes
after 2008 uh you know we talking like
five million people yeah well there were
a lot of ordinary people who suffered
and a lot of extraordinary people who
didn't and there was an awful lot of
corporate bailout and socialization of
risk and privatization of profit right
that was really that was really a dismal
outcome now you know I think it is hard
to keep
Enterprises on the hook financially
because with a big
company partly because the executive
leadership and even the ownership of the
company can switch quite dramatically
it's not like you can hold a company to
the same standards of responsibility
that you can hold an individual to it's
slippery and tricky and it isn't
obviously the case too that you should
be too punitive with regards to your
business class if they engage in
Ventures that don't work out well
because then you suppress Innovation and
risk-taking I mean that's one of the
advantages of having bankruptcy laws
right this means you get to fail without
dying and that's really useful given
that you have to fail quite a bit often
before you can succeed but it still did
seem to me that you know the chickens
didn't come home to roost as thoroughly
as they might have in the aftermath of
the 2008 financial crisis I also wonder
too tell me what you think about this
you know we've seen the rise of woke
capitalism to a great degree in the last
well let's say since 2008 um it seems to
me that you know there's a fair bit of
unrequited and maybe deserving guilt on
the part of highflying capitalists who
made their money in manners that might
be a little bit more crooked than
necessary and that one of the ways they
can pay the piper hypothetically without
actually having to go through any
serious moral revaluation is to beat the
ESG drum for example on the climate side
or to pretend to be in accordance with
that what what what with whatever the
newest woke delusion is on the Civil
Rights front and so it's a false
Contrition and I think that's emerged in
the aftermath of unpunished maleant
let's say on the corporate front with
regard to the financial crisis of 2008
so I don't know what you think about
that theory that's interesting uh yeah I
mean so I often you get people who are
um confused about uh my take on all this
because they think that because I wrote
very critically about companies like
Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan Chase and um
you know Bank of America that um you
know a communist or anti- capitalist
actually nearly all of my sources during
that time period were people who worked
on Wall Street they were you know other
rich people basically and their
complaint about these companies um was
not that they were uh being too Arch
capitalist but that rather they were
subverting capitalism by cheating and
relying on
bailouts uh and um you know and
manipulating markets in ways that were
unfair to you know sort of the smaller
sized
competitor and um I think that was a
consistency theme of what happened there
were cases they could have made and uh
that would have been you know I think
important to the markets it would have
sent a message that no matter how big
you are uh you're not outside the reach
of the law and and it would have it
would have restored faith in this idea
that um you know that the government
isn't basically a silent partner of
these gigantic Banks uh that was clearly
yes that will always back stop them in
times of trouble uh and won't look into
you know money laundering and other
problems uh and that's why we're having
this crisis with small Regional Banks
now among other things because the
markets know that uh it's cheaper for
big Banks to borrow money because
everybody knows they'll always get
bailed out um you that's an inherent
advantage that they shouldn't have I
don't think uh in capitalism so all of
that is a hangover of 20 8 the ESG thing
is I think just another version of the
same ratings agency scam that um we saw
with mortgages it's just that they're
they're playing around with different
terminology and
Insider um you know sort of rigging of
the game uh this time it's more
political doesn't seem to be working out
so well for Disney right exactly uh you
know I I I think these schemes always
when whenever they try to get uh you
know game the system too much that way
it it always ends up seeming to backfire
um I think yeah well that that that it
does backfire if the market if a
well-regulated market actually retains
its dominance and because as you pointed
out too you know the people who are
playing the capitalist game honestly and
that's the majority of people who are
conducting business in the US because
otherwise the US would not be as filthy
rich as it is and so unbelievably stable
and productive right cuz things actually
get done and they work and that means
that people who actually get things done
and work are doing those things now
there's a handful of Bad actors on the
capitalist side and it's definitely not
in the interest of honest capitalists to
let the dishonest Crooks game the whole
system and get away with it on the
regulatory capture side Etc you know
that's really a place where the left and
the right could come together you know
with in their totally that yeah okay
okay so let's talk about your last three
books briefly and then I want to cover
the debate you had with Douglas Murray
Michelle Goldberg and Malcolm Gladwell
it was you and Douglas on the same team
and a little bit on the Twitter files
but let's go through Insane Clown
president I can't breathe and hate in if
you could just say a little bit about
each of those books I think that would
be very interesting let's start with
Insane Clown
president yeah so insane clown president
is is basically just a compilation of
all the stuff that I wrote in 2016
mainly for Rolling Stones
about the Trump campaign there we
decided after Trump won that there was
probably enough of an appetite out there
for uh reading about what happened
during the campaign that people would
buy that book and you know it turned out
to be true it was an it was a bestseller
um but the thing that I like about that
book when I go back and look at it and I
don't like all my books um but I think
that one uh early on you know I think I
called a lot of what happened with the
Trump campaign correctly um you know my
early impressions of his campaign was
that he was on to something uh
that if um sort of mainstream American
pundits didn't wake up they were going
to find out very quickly that uh you
know they were making him stronger by
Mis misreporting things about him and um
and then you know there is a SE of that
book where I I I was convinced by
upholster that he had absolutely no
chance of winning and so I I kind of got
the wrong impression that his campaign
was really going to result historically
just in the destruction of the
Republican Party um but I think there
were a lot of things about that book
that that captured 2016 correctly and it
was um you know it's a funny book to
read too because there were a lot there
was a lot of odd stuff that happened on
the campaign Trail so yeah so what did
you what did you come to make of trump
both in terms of his like strengths and
weaknesses what's your assessment of
Donald Trump well one of the first times
I saw Trump in person was in New
Hampshire um I think I was in Plymouth
New Hampshire I was at Plymouth State
University I think was the was the local
and you know the Press is always on a
riser we always look ridiculous standing
in the middle of a a political event and
Trump started to talk about us he you
know like he feels the crowds out like a
comedian he he looked at us and he said
you see these people over here see these
blood suckers you know they they've
never come so far for an event they they
hate me they want me to lose so bad they
want all of you to lose and I I watched
as the crowd kind of turned toward us
and started hissing and they were
throwing Bits of Paper at us and
everything and I immediately recognized
this is going to work you know um and
the reason I knew it was going to work
is because who doesn't hate ger jals
like uh you know just look at us you
know and and there were a lot of people
you in your Mongolian basketball career
well yeah they don't know the average
person probably doesn't know about that
but the the ordinary
journalist uh you know a political
journalist who covers presidential
campaigns is very specific type of
character it that person is always
wearing a gingham shirt a tie and khakis
and asks you one question and that he
already knows the answer that he wants
um and then goes back to you know and
then writes the story they've already
pre-written people hate that person you
know and I recognize for good reason
right and and so Trump picked up on that
and then he started to move not just
from the Press but to other institutions
you know NATO the FED um you know
Congress obviously but what he was doing
he he was feeling in his crowds that
that there was this enormous amount of
resentment out there about all kinds of
issues um and he was feeding it I think
in many cases with very sensible and
real criticisms some of the things he
said I totally disagreed with and I
thought were outlandish and crazy and
unnecessary um but he was so to what
degree to what degree do you think the
the the the thing that concerns me let's
say about figures such as Trump even
though he's singular in many ways is
that when you're attempting to redress
populist concerns you can go in two
directions right you can listen to the
concerns and you can honestly try to
formulate responses and policies that
would deal with those concerns or you
can capitalize on that resentment and
Foster it and that's a very very
dangerous road to walk down now I'm not
making a categorical judgment that Trump
did one or the other of those I'm
curious about what you thought because
of course his populist front was what in
principle terrified his though the
people who became incredibly paranoid
about him but what was your sense you
watched him and you watched his handling
of the crowd you said that he would do
things like single out the journalists
and turn the crowd against them you know
For Better or For Worse was your sense
that he
was was he manipulating in the crowds
was he manipulating the crowds and
himself at the same time was he playing
a relatively straight game you know what
what what what do you think he was up to
and you you kind of you also compared
him to a comedian right that could read
the crowd and a leader can do that but
you can be led astray by the darkest
impulses of the crowd too yeah so it was
interesting because I was covering Trump
and Bernie Sanders at the same time and
Sanders was picking up on a lot of the
same things but his answer to those
grievances he had a long list of policy
solutions that he was was really really
anxious to implement Trump on the other
hand I think you at heart Donald Trump
is a salesperson like that's who he is
he's always selling something right and
it was funny to watch the reporters
because they were all carrying around um
you know books about fascism and you
know like you know the 1930s whereas
they should have been uh reading books
about sales culture because that was the
key to understanding Donald Trump and uh
I thought Trump basically was selling
outrage he was
selling um he was selling the experience
of
feeling uh solidarity with other people
who' been screwed over and he was so he
was fostering those feelings and people
I think you know to answer your question
yeah yeah and did you detect a danger in
that did you get did you detect a danger
in that I mean because look there are
times being frustrated and wanting
Justice those two things aren't that
easy to distinguish right right and
being resentful and wanting Justice
those two things aren't always that easy
to distinguish either right I mean it's
a tricky business because you know you
say well you should forgive and forget
and people think that's the highest
possible dictum but justice has its
place as well and if you have been
screwed over and I think the American
working class has been screwed over in
many ways although whether that was
planned or just incidental is a
different question they had their
reasons to be outraged now Trump
obviously appealed to that outrage
you're you're intimating that you
believe that he capitalized it on it as
well though in a way that you didn't see
characteristic of Bernie Sanders now of
course Bernie also didn't wasn't
burdened with the delusion that he was
likely to win no and and Bernie didn't
really he didn't have the same ability
to connect with people that Trump had
right right right yeah yeah um you know
I I that that's a difficult question
right because it's the it gets to the
question of motivation you I would say I
never got the sense that Donald Trump
was
honestly a reformer that that was really
his motivation was to uh you know change
the system and that he was up at night
reading policy proposals that wasn't my
impression I think Donald Trump you know
over the over time I got the idea
basically and this was in part from
talking to people who knew him which was
that he was insecure but mostly just
wanted to be liked um I didn't find the
you know that the core of him was
terribly scary maybe I was wrong in
perceiving it that way um but well I
don't I don't think the evidence is
clear that you were wrong I mean look
under Trump we had no
Wars you know that wasn't such a bad
thing and we did get the Abraham Accords
and the economy did quite nicely and I
don't think the culture wars were raging
as intently under Trump even though they
raged away quite madly as they are now
so you know for all of Trump's purported
dangers he was much less of a threat
certainly on the international stage
than he might have been and that
everybody had been afraid he would be
and I do think also that he generated a
certain degree of respect and
apprehension from you know the more
authoritarian types around the world and
I certainly don't think that's the case
with Biden at all because I think Biden
like Trudeau I think is beneath contempt
in relationship to people like the
president of China so and I don't think
that was true for Trump cuz at least he
was unpredictable or had that appearance
so I don't I don't think you were out of
line in your failure to see anything
truly malevolent in Trump yeah I mean I
I I don't I don't know I mean I I my
impression of him was that
he he was doing this for a lot of
reasons that was complicated he he has a
a mischievous streak in him um it was it
was clear watching his family early in
the campaign that they wanted no part of
any idea that he might win um but and I
wasn't exactly sure that he wanted to
win but right right yeah well I thought
it was an exercise in brand awareness
expansion at least and quite a brilliant
one in some ways if if you're thinking
purely from the perspective of sales
right and and he was selling himself the
entire time and he was doing a great job
at it I mean you know the with the tools
that were available to him uh he was a
Pioneer in many respects by bypassing
the media and going straight to people
using Twitter and that sort of thing um
all that was very interesting and I
think that was something that if people
had looked honestly at the situation
they would have found really compelling
uh to study instead I you know the
establishment press just settled on a
narrative about him about halfway
through the campaign and from there it
was just attack attack attack and it
became um I would say on a sort of
ongoing one interesting diet tribe from
that point forward yeah well it would
have been a lot more compelling had
there been real journalists covering the
Trump phenomena trying to figure out
what the hell was going on because at
minimum it was insanely interesting and
not predictable in the least and and
mysterious and it would have been good
to get to the bottom of it like I said I
think Victor Davis Hansen did a nice job
in his book the Case for Trump I I think
it's a very even-handed treatment uh of
without the kind of crazy Gonzo
journalism
style that you know might have added
something quite compelling to the to the
overall analysis of trump what did you
do with um I can't breathe and hate in
the other two books 2017 and
2019 yeah I I lived very close to where
Eric Garner um was killed in Staten
Island I was in New Jersey um just a
short drive away so I decided to do a
book about um what happened there and I
just just on a lark I went to the
neighborhood hung out in the street for
a little bit talked to some of his
friends and found that he was I thought
an very interesting person so I thought
it might be cool to write a book about
this this guy and you know so I spent a
couple of years really just talking to
drug dealers and hanging out in the
street and ended up with a portrait of
what happened uh to Garner all the
different forces that converg to um
cause
you know that incident and you know left
with an understanding of police
brutality that was a lot more um
complicated than people made it out
after the George George Floyd incident
which I think is um was unfortunate well
Co complicated in in in what ways what
did you
learn well I think a lot of what
happened with cops in cities like New
York uh especially after the
implementation of programs like broken
windows was that they were uh forced by
these new stats based policing regimes
to um create artificially uh engender
contacts with the population when they
weren't necessary uh you know the the
court case Ohio V ter which is from 1968
in the United States allowed police to
randomly stop and search people on the
street
and police departments clue it into the
idea that if they did enough of those
stops they would find people who were
who had warrants on them that they would
probably grab a lot of guns uh that
people were carrying Andor stop people
from carrying them in the first place so
they did hundreds of thousands of these
stops and on the surface that might
sound like a good idea but what ended up
happening was a lot of people got
frustrated with being stopped and
searched uh and a lot of those incidents
went wrong and that's how a lot of these
police brutality cases happen they they
happen because they begin with some
really stupid reason for stopping
somebody on the street somebody gets mad
and it ends up in a melee and somebody
dies and that's that unfortunately is is
the backdrop for a lot of these
cases right okay okay well I I read
recently that there's no real evidence
that the police are more us likely to
use deadly force for example on black
people compared to white people in fact
I think the stats show slightly the
reverse but that that's not true at all
when it comes to arguably well more
minor in some ways acts of of harassment
let's say or or of of continual
investigation and stopping and so you
know it would be nice if we could have a
sensible discussion about that and
actually get to the bottom of what's
going on do you think that those more
frequent stopping programs
promoted by that say broken window
hypothesis and that hypothesis is by the
way for those of you who are watching
and listening is that you have to attend
to minor infractions of the law to set a
tenor that stops more major infractions
of the law which is the reverse for
example of what they seem to be doing
now in places like California do you
think there's any credibility to the
claim that the implementation of those
policies did in fact lead to the radical
reductions in rate for example in places
like New York City what was your sense
of that when you looked into
it well there's a couple of problems
with the way they implemented broken
windows in New York one is that they
overtly uh in many cases told the
officers to do more of those stops in
certain neighborhoods than than in
others um one one of the reasons stop
and frisk was overturned in New York is
because they had one of the captains on
tape basically telling you know a whole
bunch of Patrol cops uh you know I'm
looking for black males age 18 to 21 you
know like he says that openly right um
so there was a mass I think and this
goes to your point earlier there may not
be a discrepancy about deadly force but
there's a huge discrepancy in terms of
the more minor stops right and
especially about things like drug
arrests are are you really going to get
fewer drug arrests if you stop everybody
on Wall Street and look through their
stuff uh um then you you might if you
you know stop everybody in Bushwick or
uh Brownsville or someplace like that I
think it would be closer than than most
people would think and so that in gender
hostility they used it as a way to kind
of keep property values high in some
places um by basically using police to
clear out undesirable looking people
that was the narrative with Garner
Garner was kind of a slovenly dressed uh
obese guy who sat in a corner selling
illegal cigarettes and there was a condo
complex across the street that didn't
like it and um and so he kept getting
moved off the corner and got tired of it
and you know some of those things that
you mentioned the broken windows Theory
it wasn't just minor things that are
against the law it's what they called
order maintenance so it's things that
were the things that were maybe not
against the law right that they were
also cleaning up and yeah well there's
always going to be tremendous dispute
about exactly where to draw the line in
situations like that I mean which is why
you need a variety of different
approaches I guess to try to find out
what actually works because it seems to
me that places like Portland and
Vancouver and Canada increasingly
Toronto and uh San Francisco have gone
far too far in the opposite direction
and you have just you know absolute
chaos reigning in in places where that
shouldn't be happening but then by the
same token you you can't just you can't
justop stop enforcing the law either I
mean that doesn't work either right
right right no penalty for shoplifting
under $1,000 just doesn't seem like a
very good solution for example all right
and so let's turn to the last book that
you that you finished I believe it's the
last one hate Inc
2019 you want to say a few words about
that and then we'll talk about the
debate you had recently with Douglas
Murray and and sure so hay ink um I had
always loved when I was a kid the the
book as I mentioned before manufacturing
consent I grew up in a family of
journalists my father was a television
reporter and that book was very eye
openening to me even though I'd been
around the media my whole life uh
because it was about the unspoken
pressures that go into um editorial
decisions before they get to the
reporter you know why are some stories
uh assigned and not others right um why
why do why do people uh at ABC or CBS
why do they freak out about the
assassination of a Catholic priest in
Poland but not in El Salvador um you
know it's that kind of thing I always
thought that book was interesting so I
wanted to do basically a um a new
version of that uh for the internet age
and see if anything had changed and I I
talked to Chomsky before I started
writing the book I said are you okay
with me doing this project and he sort
of said okay and um and the premise of
the book that I came up with is that the
internet had changed the game
significantly and that uh really for
financial reasons um the media business
had evolved in this new Direction where
uh instead of uh trying to go for the
whole audience which is how uh ABC CBS
NBC made their money in the old days now
they were using the new model which was
what you might call um audience
optimization where you pick a
demographic and try to dominate it and
that's how we get this basically
stratified fractured media landscape
where you have some companies that are
selling only to Blue leaning audiences
and then some that are only selling to
the right and that's a very successful
commercial formula but as news it's
really bad because what ends up
happening is that you're just giving
your audience what they want to hear
most of the time usually about the
people on the other side
and that's that formula that that um
commercial formula of doing news uh I
think has been a major driver of a lot
of the kind of culture War division in
this country you think how much of that
do you think's an inevitable consequence
of again of technological transformation
because I mean ABC CBS NBC they
dominated when television bandwidth was
well almost infinitely expensive in
every second that you were speaking on
video was unbelievably uh uh financially
demanding and the audiences were huge
and and in some ways homogeneous now
especially with YouTube video is
basically free and so and that means an
infinite number of channels because of
course there is a virtually infinite
number of channels on YouTube and it
isn't obvious to me at all that in a
landscape like that you can have
anything other than fracturing and I
think the primary driver of the
disintegration of the Legacy Media isn't
so much their transformation into woke
ideologues although that hasn't helped
and it's been embedded by the idiot
universities but the fact that there's
just no bloody way they can compete you
know I mean you have your own substack
and I I believe that's doing quite well
and like people who are talented
journalists like well and uh Barry Weiss
is a good example there's just no reason
for her not to go out on her own and to
start her own newspaper for for all
intents and purposes so I mean do I
don't see I don't see any way back from
that
essentially yeah you're absolutely right
um in fact you you nailed the main thing
about it you know I remember I I
interviewed the former publisher of
the newspaper in
Dallas and he said that up until the80s
the news business was a scarcity
business there were only there were only
so many slots in the newspaper to sell
wads there were there were only so many
hours on TV there were only so many um
hours on radio and those slots basically
had Limitless value um because there was
no other way to reach audiences for
advertising you put the internet into
the into the mix suddenly it goes from
scarcity
to you know Infinity there you know all
those things that you that were
immensely valuable before are now
essentially worthless
um and you have to find a new commercial
strategy for making
money the it's evolved to the this place
where selling subscriptions is the only
way to go but the problem with that is
that uh it doesn't pay for things like
investigative journalism as well um it
doesn't pay for foreign bureaus in you
know Jakarta and Moscow it doesn't pay
for an awful lot of things so um you
know the the news business has suffered
I think it's lost its way um trying to
navigate this new terrain where money is
so scarce um not knowing whether to
chase after clickbait or whether to
stick to journalistic principles or to
or what to do exactly and so that so so
all those brands have been irrevocably
damaged I think um and you know nothing
has stepped up to replace it uh yet well
and speaking of that you were just in
Toronto not so long ago at the
increasingly famous monk debates they
apparently seem to be doing something
right and you and Douglas Murray faced
off against Michelle Goldberg and um
Malcolm Gladwell Malcolm Malcolm
Gladwell Malcolm Gladwell and I believe
that you and Douglas won the debate by
the biggest margin that had ever
occurred at the monk debates and
actually speaking to an audience that in
principle shouldn't have been
particularly favorable to your claims
right because the monk debate audiences
Toronto Ottawa Montreal glitterati such
as you know such as we produce in Canada
um are equivalent of people who think
they're celebrities let's say that might
be a good way of thinking about it and
the probability that they would be both
beholden to and fundamental supporters
of the Legacy Media was extremely high
and yet by all accounts you moop the
floor with um both Michelle and um
Malcolm so do you want to walk through
that a little bit tell everybody what
the debate was about first and and tell
me your impression questions of the
whole of the whole
Enterprise first of all I had an amazing
time it was um it's a great event um I I
think anybody who has the opportunity to
attend the monk debate should definitely
do it uh the the resolution was be it
resolved do not trust the mainstream
media and so uh Michelle and Malcolm
were arguing the Nay portion and uh
Douglas and I were arguing the yay
portion and you said that we moop the
with him really Douglas mopped the floor
with him and I was kind of there um but
the you know he he's he's very
impressive uh as an orator and as a
stage performer and he was very Qui as a
fighter as a fter he actually enjoys it
and so yeah you you you mess with
Douglas at your peril exactly exactly uh
but another thing I think that that that
really turned the tide with that debate
was um kind of kind of the superior
attitude I I would say of a couple of
the participants Malcolm in particular I
I don't have anything in particular
against him but I I made the observation
at one point that Walter kronite had
twice been voted the most trusted person
in America in the 70s and 80s and uh
Malcolm wouldn't let that go he kept
implying that um by saying that I was
longing for the the days of Jim Crow uh
in America and that I had forgotten that
when those votes were taken by the way
he was wrong about this when those votes
were taken that you know lots of people
didn't have it so great in America um
you know implying that this was the 50s
or the 40s when you know women gays and
African-Americans had a tough time in
the states poor people were doing a hell
of a lot better on the marital front
back then than they are now by a large
margin and there were a lot fewer
children who were fatherless so you know
some things have improved but there's
lots of things that haven't improved so
we might not want to be too smug and
Superior about how well we're doing on
the moral front compared to 40 years ago
I mean lots of things have changed for
the better but it's by no means a
universal Panacea let's say and and
that's especially true for poor people
who are nonetheless on average richer
but I would put that at the feet of
capitalism you know rather than of any
you know well-meaning government program
or ideology so anyways he he you said he
adopted a Meen of superiority on what
basis well he he essentially he was
calling me a racist for making that OBS
observation so
um and he went back to it five times and
by the fifth time there were actually
sort of audible gasps in the in the
audience so I think that had something
to do with what happened with with the
debate well that sort of thing actually
doesn't play very well in
Canada you know um mhm yeah that the the
people who I debated at the monk debates
they played that same mistake too they
played the racial racial card and racist
card yeah and Canadian
audiences they don't like that much
because that hasn't really been part of
our parland the part of the tenor of our
our public discussions not nearly as
much as in the US I mean we're trying
hard to get there and we might be
successful in this country but generally
it's not a good strategy so yeah yeah so
did you learn did did you think that
Goldberg and and uh
Gladwell made any points in relationship
to why the Legacy Media might still be
worthy of support and
Trust well their basic argument was that
the procedures of the Legacy Media uh
are still good procedures you know
factchecking that sort of thing and
and we countered with yes those are good
things un fortunately they're mostly
gone from Legacy Media organizations and
that's one of the reasons that you have
problems like the Russia gate case where
you know one story after the other goes
sideways and you you guys don't catch it
um and that's I think there's still a
failure of vision I still know a lot of
people who work in in Legacy Media and
there's a a slowness to recognize that
audience is no longer I think um really
believe what they're reading uh in a lot
of these organizations in the New York
Times Washington Post they see it as
politicized uh not terribly reliable
factually and I think that's a shame
even as an independent I I think the
mainstream media needs to be good right
like I I think it's everybody uh
everybody benefits when it is um but but
they haven't figured out that in order
in order to have that respect that they
think they deserve that they just can't
get this many things wrong and um that's
been the that's been the fact the they
don't get to be the Legacy Media without
maintaining a genuine
respectability right exactly exactly
yeah yeah yeah so so let me let me close
here with um a question about the
Twitter file Revelations so you know
since you were instrumental in the
process that lead led to the release of
the so-called Twitter files the first
response from the Legacy Media was
um there's
uh what would you say there's nothing to
be seen there and the second response
was well there was something to be seen
but we knew it all along and that's
really where the story has settled now
you know I was reading your Wikipedia
page for example while preparing for
this interview and some of the
criticisms about the Twitter Falls were
well you know nothing that we didn't
know already was revealed and so there's
nothing to see here folks and so what do
what do you think about that what's your
sense of of tell us about participating
in the release of the Twitter files and
what you think the cultural consequence
really was well first of all interesting
what's interesting about it is that
TimeWise it happened um I I learned that
I was going to be doing that right
before the monk debate um we actually
got asked a question about about Elon
Musk maybe opening up the Twitter files
during the debate and I had to pretend
um that I didn't know the answer to that
question uh so I flew to San Francisco
right from
Toronto
and you know the first batch of the
Twitter files which was about the
suppression of the hunter Biden story
was interesting but I wouldn't say that
it was groundbreaking there was there
was stuff in there that that was worth
publishing but it wasn't until we
started to see this organized system of
communication um between the FBI the
Department of Homeland Security the
Office of the Director of National
Intelligence and all these
platforms uh that there was this sort of
Highway of content moderation requests
that was flowing to all of these
companies I I don't know that anybody
knew that that was happening um I
certainly didn't know that that was
happening and you know the Twitter
itself was denying that it even engaged
in Shadow Banning before the Twitter
files we got rid of that the first day
um and and you know I think what
happened was the argument eventually
became well this is going on but it's
not illegal it's not technically a First
Amendment violation because they're not
ordering these no it's just it's just
behind the scenes collusion between
government and big media hidden from the
public nothing to see here you know and
whether or not something is technically
illegal that's a pretty damn shaky moral
argument it's not a bad legal argument
yeah and it's funny because I I got a
lot of critic ISM about that and my
response was always well I don't care
what it is you know that's that's a
matter for judges to decide or jurries
to decide I'm not going to I'm not going
to worry about that but I I can tell you
that showing this to audiences um what
it looks like in practice that not only
Americans but a lot of people all over
the world thought this was crazy and
they really didn't like it and they and
it scared them and I think we can see
that with you know lawsuits like the
Missouri V Biden lawsuit now where a
judge has ordered it all to stop uh you
know this it's a big issue in
America and around the world frankly
because you really can't have you know a
free culture without free speech and
this is a very organized assault on the
entire concept and um I I think we need
to have a big debate about uh how we're
going to go forward on the internet
and not do it in secret the way they
were trying to do it yeah yeah well it
looks to it looked to me you know
watching that from the outside that I
found the documentation revelatory and
the exposure of what I think of as
fascist collusion at the highest levels
of government and media appalling beyond
the Bel belief especially when allied
with the fact that it was really put in
the hands of a very tiny number of
extremely radical people at Twitter who
are making these wide scale decisions
with absolutely no right whatso or
training or or competence or moral
guidance to be doing so and so I thought
you guys did a great service and um oh
thank you I thought it was a good bang
off beginning to Elon musk's re
revolutionary takeover of Twitter and uh
you know he re reinstated me pretty
quickly after he purchased the company
and I was happy about that because well
happy and unhappy because then I was
back on Twitter and you know it's a
terrible snake pit but but an attractive
one so anyways I certainly found that it
was useful and the the fact that you
were
exposing this high level collusion
designed to take out free speech in a
manner that was extraordinarily
dangerous obviously you know that the
way we communicated about everything
during the pandemic lockdown which was
an outbreak of authoritarianism far
greater than the D with a far greater
danger than any danger posed by the
bloody virus I think the fact that that
that all came to light was absolutely
necessary so well so thank you for that
as far as I'm
concerned glad hear for coming up also
for coming up to Canada and you
know delivering a good trouncing to
the well yeah yeah yeah any excuse to
come to Toronto I love that's one of my
favorite cities in the world so my wife
yeah well we're going to we're going to
do something about that real soon now
that we've elected a very farle mayor so
um I'm going to continue talking to Matt
on the dailywire plus side of these
interviews he said something interesting
to me during the YouTube conversation
that I want to follow up on he said that
as a kid he was very introverted and
he's obviously dealt with that problem
to a large degree and I'd like to delve
into exactly how and why that
transformation occurred and to track the
development of Matt's interest in his
career which are obviously
multi-dimensional across the span of his
life so we're going to do that on the
day Weare plus side join us there if
you're inclined to otherwise thank you
all for watching and listening your
attention is much appreciated and to the
film crew here in Northern Ontario to
the Daily wire plus people for
facilitating these conversations and
professionalizing them on the production
side and to Matt thank you all very much
for talking to me today I appreciate
everything you said th thank you so much
for having me I appreciate it it's I'm
glad to finally meet
you
[Music]